.Dd February 15, 2026
.Dt VALIDATE-ACTION-PINS 1
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm validate-action-pins
.Nd verify GitHub Actions SHA pins and inventory their refs
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm
.Op Fl -help
.Op Fl -version
.Ar file ...
.Nm
.Cm check
.Op Fl -only Ar all Ns | Ns Ar tag Ns | Ns Ar branch
.Ar file ...
.Nm
.Cm list
.Op Fl -format Ar plain Ns | Ns Ar tsv
.Op Fl -only Ar all Ns | Ns Ar tag Ns | Ns Ar branch
.Ar file ...
.Nm
.Cm updates
.Op Fl -format Ar plain Ns | Ns Ar tsv
.Op Fl -only Ar all Ns | Ns Ar tag Ns | Ns Ar branch
.Ar file ...
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Nm
scans GitHub Actions workflow files for
.Ic uses:\&
lines pinned to a commit SHA with a ref comment, for example:
.Pp
.Dl uses: actions/checkout@de0fac2e... # v6
.Dl uses: Homebrew/actions/setup-homebrew@1234abcd... # main
.Pp
The comment follows the Dependabot convention \(em the ref may be a tag
or a branch name, with no prefix to distinguish them.
.Nm
probes the GitHub REST API for a matching tag first and falls back to a
branch of the same name.
Each unique action/ref pair is resolved once; subsequent occurrences
within the same file are deduplicated.
.Pp
For tag pins, a SHA mismatch is a hard failure
.Pq Li FAIL , exit 1 .
For branch pins, a SHA mismatch is informational
.Pq Li WARN , exit 0
because branch heads move continuously; the tool reports how many
commits the pin is behind the branch head
.Po from
.Ic /repos/\:{owner}/{repo}/compare/{base}...{head} Pc ,
or notes that the pin has diverged from the current history.
.Pp
Output lines are prefixed with the workflow filename:
.Pp
.Dl OK \ \ \ ci.yml: actions/checkout@de0fac2e4500... matches v6
.Dl FAIL \ ci.yml: actions/checkout@de0fac2e4500... does NOT match v6 (expected abc123456789...)
.Dl WARN \ ci.yml: Homebrew/actions/setup-homebrew@de0fac2e4500... is 3 commit(s) behind main HEAD (at abc123456789...)
.Dl WARN \ ci.yml: org/action@de0fac2e4500... diverges from main HEAD (at abc123456789...)
.Dl WARN \ ci.yml: org/action@de0fac2e4500... \(em could not resolve ref v6
.Pp
If the API is unreachable or a required dependency is missing, the check
is skipped and the tool exits successfully.
.Sh SUBCOMMANDS
The subcommand word may appear anywhere among the positional
arguments \(em before, between, or after files and flags \(em and
is consumed on its first occurrence.
Use
.Ic --
to disambiguate a workflow file whose name happens to match a
subcommand.
.Bl -tag -width indent
.It Cm check Ar file ...
Verify SHA pins in the given workflow files.
This is the default when no subcommand is given; bare
.Ic validate-action-pins Ar file ...
is equivalent to
.Ic validate-action-pins check Ar file ... .
.It Cm list Oo Fl -format Ar plain Ns | Ns Ar tsv Oc Oo Fl -only Ar all Ns | Ns Ar tag Ns | Ns Ar branch Oc Ar file ...
Print every
.Ic uses:\&
pin found in the input files.
Offline by default
.Pq Fl -only Ar all :
no API calls, no authentication.
When
.Fl -only
is set to
.Em tag
or
.Em branch ,
each unique pin is classified authoritatively via the GitHub API
and only matching pins are emitted.
.Pp
Plain output has the form
.Dl <basename>: <action>@<ref>  (# <comment>)
.Pp
TSV output (one record per line, no header) has the fields:
.Dl <file>\etab<action>\etab<ref>\etab<kind>\etab<comment>
where
.Em kind
is
.Em sha
for 40-hex pins and
.Em ref
for symbolic references (tag or branch; not distinguished without an API call).
.Pp
Actions pinned to a
.Ic docker://
scheme or a local
.Ic ./
path are skipped.
.It Cm updates Oo Fl -format Ar plain Ns | Ns Ar tsv Oc Ar file ...
Report upgrade inventory for each unique pin.
For tag pins, every tag strictly newer than the current ref is listed
\(em across both minor and major bumps, since Dependabot does not open
major-version pull requests by default.
For branch pins, the current branch HEAD SHA is reported so
SHA-to-branch pins that have drifted are visible at a glance.
Output is informational \(em
.Cm updates
exits 0 whether or not upgrades are available.
.Pp
Plain output:
.Dl <basename>: <action>  current=<ref>  [up-to-date]  (<kind>)
.Dl <basename>: <action>  current=<ref>  newer=<t1> <t2> ...  (tag)
.Dl <basename>: <action>  current=<ref>  head=<short-sha>  (branch)
.Pp
TSV output (five columns, no header):
.Dl <file>\etab<action>\etab<ref>\etab<available>\etab<kind>
where
.Em available
is a space-separated list of newer tags for tag pins, the short HEAD
SHA for stale branch pins, or empty when up-to-date.
.Pp
Tag refs are parsed as
.Em v?X[.Y[.Z]]
with missing components treated as zero, so
.Em v6 ,
.Em v6.0 ,
and
.Em v6.0.0
compare equal.
Pre-release (e.g.
.Em -rc1 ,
.Em -beta )
and non-semver tag names are skipped.
.Pp
Each unique action/ref pair costs at most one GitHub API call.
Setting
.Ev GITHUB_TOKEN
is effectively required for any workflow with more than a handful of
pins because the unauthenticated rate limit is 60 requests per hour.
The first page of
.Ic /tags
is consulted (30 entries); repos with many tags across majors may need
pagination, which is not implemented in this iteration.
.El
.Sh OPTIONS
.Bl -tag -width indent
.It Fl -format Ar plain Ns | Ns Ar tsv
Output format for
.Cm list
and
.Cm updates .
Default is
.Em plain .
.It Fl -only Ar all Ns | Ns Ar tag Ns | Ns Ar branch
Restrict output to a single classified kind.
For
.Cm check ,
the classification is the authoritative kind returned by the API
(tag vs branch); unresolvable refs are reported only with
.Em all .
For
.Cm updates ,
the classification is the routing kind (which API endpoint was
consulted).
For
.Cm list ,
.Em all
is offline and lists every parseable pin; passing
.Em tag
or
.Em branch
taps the GitHub API per unique pin to classify authoritatively
before filtering.
Default is
.Em all .
.It Fl -help
Show a usage summary and exit.
.It Fl -version
Print the program name and version, then exit.
.El
.Sh ENVIRONMENT
.Bl -tag -width indent
.It Ev GITHUB_TOKEN
Optional GitHub personal access token or fine-grained token.
When set, API requests use the token for authentication, raising the
rate limit from 60 to 5\|000 requests per hour.
.El
.Sh EXIT STATUS
.Bl -tag -width indent
.It 0
All pins match their claimed tags, no pins were found in the input
files, or validation was skipped because a dependency is missing or
the GitHub API is unreachable.
.It 1
One or more pins do not match their claimed tag, or no files were
provided.
.It 2
Usage error \(em an unknown flag was supplied.
.El
.Sh EXAMPLES
Validate all workflows in a repository:
.Pp
.Dl validate-action-pins .github/workflows/*.yml
.Pp
Validate a single file:
.Pp
.Dl validate-action-pins .github/workflows/ci.yml
.Pp
Inventory every pin across the workflows:
.Pp
.Dl validate-action-pins list .github/workflows/*.yml
.Pp
Export a machine-readable pin list:
.Pp
.Dl validate-action-pins list --format=tsv .github/workflows/*.yml
.Pp
Report available upgrades for every pin (authenticated to avoid rate limits):
.Pp
.Dl GITHUB_TOKEN=... validate-action-pins updates .github/workflows/*.yml
.Pp
Pipe the upgrade report into
.Xr awk 1
for scripted processing \(em e.g. list every action that has at least
one newer tag available:
.Pp
.Dl GITHUB_TOKEN=... validate-action-pins updates --format=tsv .github/workflows/*.yml | awk -F\et '$4 != "" { print $2, "->", $4 }'
.Sh DEPENDENCIES
.Nm
requires
.Xr curl 1
and
.Xr jq 1
at runtime.
If either is missing the tool prints a warning and exits 0.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr actionlint 1
.Sh AUTHORS
.An "Knight Owl LLC"
.Pa https://github.com/knight-owl-dev/devops
.Sh LICENSE
This tool is licensed under the MIT License.
See
.Pa LICENSE
for details.
